feat: ranked-prolly-tree crate. (#262)
commontoolsinc/system: rust/ranked-prolly-tree/README.md

# ranked-prolly-tree

> `ranked-prolly-tree` (RPT) is a key-value store implemented as a [prolly tree], utilizing a flexible content-addressed block storage backend. RPT is designed to be the foundation of a lazy database, utilizing partial sync on demand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ranked-prolly-tree` (RPT) is a key-value store implemented as a [prolly tree], utilizing a flexible content-addressed block storage backend. RPT is designed to be the foundation of a passive database, providing on demand partial replication.
```

1. I think "passive" is better term here because it has no component that actively participates in replication. Lazy on the other hand often implies deferred action occurring on read/write. I suppose querying replica can be considered lazy, while source replica is passive.

2. I think using replication is more accurate term here than sync, as later to me implies bidirectional replication which isn't necessarily implied here.

## Usage

```rust
use ranked_prolly_tree::{Tree, Result};

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> Result<()> {
    let mut tree = Tree::<64, _>::default();

>     let hello = String::from("hello").into_bytes();

Reviewer: As we discussed I would recommend making higher level abstraction for keys so that layers below could take advantage of that in various ways. I think chucked nature is probably only thing that would matter.

Author: Filed: https://github.com/commontoolsinc/system/issues/272

>     let world = String::from("world").into_bytes();

Reviewer: Same could be said about the values. If those are just bytes you loose ability to swap encoding, but if they are more higher level data that would allow pluggable encoding which I think would be of high value.

Author: This is less clear to me than on the key side (https://github.com/commontoolsinc/system/issues/272); encoding is pluggable, and only requires inputs implementing serde's `Serialize` and `DeserializeOwned` but still wouldn't support changing encodings on the fly (though a migrator is possible).

    tree.set(hello.clone(), world.clone()).await?;
    assert_eq!(tree.get(&hello).await?.unwrap(), world);
    Ok(())
}
```

## Support

|                       | native | wasm32 browser |
| :-------------------- | -----: | -------------: |
| [`MemoryStore`]       |   ✅   |       ✅       |
| [`SyncMemoryStore`]   |   ✅   |       ✅       |
| [`FileSystemStore`]   |   ✅   |       ❌       |
| [`IndexedDbStore`]    |   ❌   |       ✅       |

## Design

> RPT is the basis for a lazy database that can efficiently synchronize with a remote block store. Repeatedly requesting data from a server incurs overhead, and we attempt to return addition data in blocks to reduce latency in future requests with caching, especially when nearby groups of keys are accessed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RPT is the basis for a passive database that efficiently hydrates from a remote block store. Repeatedly requesting data from a server incurs overhead, and we attempt to cache ahead data to reduce latency in future queries, especially when accessing nearby key ranges.
```

RPT is a [prolly tree] implementation where nodes are represented by a *block* in a block store. The bottom level contains **leaf** (💚) nodes, which represent key/value pairs, ordered by their keys, and are always at the same level. **Segments** (💙) are parents of leaf nodes. **Branches** (💜) are nodes whose children are either segments or other branches.

> An example tree of 5 entries (with keys 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, values omitted) and their rank, and segment and branches with the maximum key, or the largest/right-most key in their descendants:

Reviewer: I think I have mentioned this in one of our calls, but it may have gotten lost. I think it may be a good idea to capture key ranges as opposed to just upper bound. This would make it possible to abort early when looking for key or scanning out of range, specifically it will let us know gaps between nodes and consequently identify whether specific key (or range of keys) is even contained by the tree.

Also when encoding adjacent nodes (when there are no gaps) we could leave out lower bound and derive it from the node on the left.

It may prove useful in some access patterns and impose overhead in the others, so ideally it would be an option al feature. From these perspective range with no lower bound can be treated as probabilistically containing key range spanning from left node upper bound, while presence of lower bound would guarantee the presence of key range.

Author: Filed https://github.com/commontoolsinc/system/issues/273

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    classDef default fill:#37474F,stroke:#CFD8DC,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff;
    classDef branch fill:#512DA8;
    classDef segment fill:#1976D2;
    classDef leaf fill:#00796B;
    classDef active fill:#D32F2F;
    Root["#a380 (max=9)"]:::branch
    P1["#1f6a (max=2)"]:::segment
    P2["#4c76 (max=9)"]:::segment
    C1["1 (R=1)"]:::leaf
    C2["2 (R=2)"]:::leaf
    C7["7 (R=1)"]:::leaf
    C8["8 (R=1)"]:::leaf
    C9["9 (R=1)"]:::leaf
    Root --> P1
    Root --> P2
    P1 --> C1
    P1 --> C2
    P2 --> C7
    P2 --> C8
    P2 --> C9 
```

> Nodes are encoded as blocks in the block store, keyed by the hash of the block. **Branches** encode tuples of each child's hash and their boundary/largest key. **Segments** encode tuples of each leaf child's key and value, inlining leaf nodes, such that leaf nodes are not directly addressable from the block store. This strategy allows efficient, lazy lookups, and retrieving additional entries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nodes are encoded as blocks in the block store, keyed by the hash of the block. **Branches** encode tuples of each child's hash and their boundary/largest key. **Segments** encode tuples of each leaf child's key and value, inlining leaf nodes, such that leaf nodes are not directly addressable from the block store. This strategy allows efficient, lazy lookups, and opportunistic preemptive caching.
```

### Qualities

> * Partial sync on demand: A tree can be lazily created given a root hash and possibly remote block store, populating nodes as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Partial on demand replication: A tree can be lazily hydrated from a tree root hash and (possibly remote) block store, loading nodes as needed.
```

* History independent: Trees containing identical data always arrive at the same shape/root hash, regardless of the order of operations.
* Non-destructive: As the nodes are represented as blocks in storage, modifying a tree creates new blocks, such that writes do not invalidate previous tree states.
* Verifiable: As a [merkle tree], each node's hash is comprised of its children hashes, allowing verification of data from the storage layer.

### Ranking

Instead of a boundary function used in prolly trees, we use a ranking function (via [Geometric Search Trees]) to determine ranks of leaf nodes based on their key. At each level in the tree, if a rank is higher than the current rank, a boundary is created. Note the example above, where the leaf with key `2` is rank 2. This creates a boundary, and subsequent leaves have a different parent. Ranks are recursively applied upward, creating new nodes as needed.

> Ranking is dependent on some branching factor branching factor (`P` in `Tree<P, _>`), where ranks probabilistically approach each node having approximately `P` children.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ranking is dependent on desired branching factor (`P` in `Tree<P, _>`), where ranks probabilistically approach each node having approximately `P` children.
```

> [!NOTE]  
> In practice, the range for the ranking function is a bit wide, e.g. a ranking factor of 64 could have nodes with 3x as many children. Investigating context-based boundary alternatives, like Dolt's [prolly tree]. 

### Operations

#### Get

> Retrieving a value accesses at most *HEIGHT* nodes. For the following example, querying for key `1` from the root, if the key exists it must be within the `#1f6a` node, as it's less than its boundary of `2`. Since `#1f6a` is a segment, all the children are ordered and available, and an entry with key `1` can be quickly found if it exists. 

Reviewer: I don't understand what first sentence here trying to say.

Author: I think your edit clarifies it, "traverses" better describes the log N nature of tree traversal

> Retrieving a value accesses at most *HEIGHT* nodes. For the following example, querying for key `1` from the root, if the key exists it must be within the `#1f6a` node, as it's less than its boundary of `2`. Since `#1f6a` is a segment, all the children are ordered and available, and an entry with key `1` can be quickly found if it exists. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieving a value requires traversing number of nodes corresponding to tree height. In the following example, querying for key `1` from the root, if the key exists it must be within the `#1f6a` node, as it's less than its boundary of `2`. Since `#1f6a` is a segment, all the children are ordered and available, and an entry with key `1` can be quickly found if it exists. 
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    classDef default fill:#37474F,stroke:#CFD8DC,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff;
    classDef branch fill:#512DA8;
    classDef segment fill:#1976D2;
    classDef leaf fill:#00796B;
    classDef active fill:#D32F2F;

    Root["#a380 (max=9)"]:::active
    P1["#1f6a (max=2)"]:::active
    P2["#4c76 (max=9)"]:::segment
    C1["1 (R=1)"]:::active
    C2["2 (R=2)"]:::leaf
    C7["7 (R=1)"]:::leaf
    C7["7 (R=1)"]:::leaf
    C8["8 (R=1)"]:::leaf
    C9["9 (R=1)"]:::leaf
    Root --> P1
    Root --> P2
    P1 --> C1
    P1 --> C2
    P2 --> C7
    P2 --> C8
    P2 --> C9 

> ```

Reviewer: I think using letters for keys might prove to be less confusing.
